## 1.3 Exercises

**Exercise**  1.1 Which of the following sequences of characters are atoms, which are variables, and which are neither?
下列哪些字符序列是原子，哪些是变量，哪些不是？

 1. vINCENT
 2. Footmassage
 3. variable23
 4. Variable2000
 5. big_kahuna_burger
 6. ’big  kahuna  burger’
 7. big  kahuna  burger
 8. ’Jules’
 9. _Jules
 10. ’_Jules’

**Exercise**  1.2 Which of the following sequences of characters are atoms, which are variables, which are complex terms, and which are not terms at all? Give the functor and arity of each complex term.
以下哪些字符序列是原子，哪些是变量，哪些是复合项，哪些根本不是术语？给出每个复合项的函子(functor)和元数(arity)。

 1. loves(Vincent,mia)
 2. ’loves(Vincent,mia)’
 3. Butch(boxer)
 4. boxer(Butch)
 5. and(big(burger),kahuna(burger))
 6. and(big(X),kahuna(X))
 7. _and(big(X),kahuna(X))
 8. (Butch  kills  Vincent)
 9. kills(Butch  Vincent)
 10. kills(Butch,Vincent

**Exercise**  1.3 How many facts, rules, clauses, and predicates are there in the following knowledge base? What are the heads of the rules, and what are the goals they contain?
下面的知识库中有多少事实、规则、子句和谓词？规则的 head 是什么?它们包含的目标(goal)是什么？

```prolog
  woman(vincent).
  woman(mia).
  man(jules).
  person(X):- man(X); woman(X).
  loves(X,Y):- father(X,Y).
  father(Y,Z):- man(Y), son(Z,Y).
  father(Y,Z):- man(Y), daughter(Z,Y).
```

**Exercise**  1.4 Represent the following in Prolog:

 1. Butch is a killer.
 2. Mia and Marsellus are married.
 3. Zed is dead.
 4. Marsellus kills everyone who gives Mia a footmassage.
 5. Mia loves everyone who is a good dancer.
 6. Jules eats anything that is nutritious or tasty.

**Exercise**  1.5 Suppose we are working with the following knowledge base:

```prolog
  wizard(ron).              % wizard: 男巫;  ron: 罗恩
  hasWand(harry).           % wand: 魔杖; broom: 扫帚;  harry: 哈利
  quidditchPlayer(harry).   % quidditch: 魁地奇球赛（《哈利·波特》)
  wizard(X):- hasBroom(X), hasWand(X).
  hasBroom(X):- quidditchPlayer(X).
```

How does Prolog respond to the following queries?

 1. wizard(ron).
 2. witch(ron).          %% witch: 女巫
 3. wizard(hermione).    %% hermione: 赫敏
 4. witch(hermione).
 5. wizard(harry).
 6. wizard(Y).
 7. witch(Y).
